# DS18B20 / DS18S20

The circuits are digital thermometers that provide temperature measurements as a slave device on a [1-Wire Bus](1wire.md).

Highlights:

* Temperatures from -55°C to +125°C
* Accuracy of ±0.5°C from -10°C to +85°C
* Alarm trigger for high and low temperatures
* Time per sample: 93.75ms at 9-bit resolution

The temperature resolution is
* programmable 9 to 12 bits for the DS18B20,
* fixed 9 bits for the DS18S20.

Please refer to the datasheets for details:
* http://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/DS18B20.pdf
* http://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/DS18S20.pdf

## ROM Family Code

The Family Code (which are 8 bits of the ROM Code) is
* 28h for the DS18B20,
* 10h for the DS18S20.

## Power Mode

If the “parasite power” mode (2-pin mode) is used, some operations won't be available. Also, some operations may require external power switching on the bus line. 

For the remainder of the document it will be assumed that the circuit is powered by an external supply (3-pin mode).

## Resolution

The temperature is provided as a [two's-complement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two%27s_complement) within a 16-bit value.

* DS18B20: a 12-significant-bit-number is provided. The leading 4 bits are a sign-extension of bit:11. Depending on the configured resolution (9 to 12 bits), least significant bits are zero.
* DS18S20: a 9-significant-bit-number is provided that reflects the 9-bit resolution. The leading 7 bits are a sign-extension of bit:8.

The first eight significant bits provide the integer part of the temperature in °C, remaining bits present the fractional part.

Bit | Fractional Increment
---: | ---:
9 |  0.5°C
10 | 0.25°C
11 | 0.125°C
12 | 0.0625°C

The table below list examples of digital output data and the corresponding temperature readings for numbers with 12 significant bits (DS18B20):

Temperature (°C) | Binary Digital Output | Hexadecimal
---: | :--- | :---
+125 | 0000 0111 1101 0000 | 07D0h
+85 | 0000 0101 0101 0000 | 0550h
+25.0625 | 0000 0001 1001 0001 | 0191h
+10.125 | 0000 0000 1010 0010 | 00A2h
+0.5 | 0000 0000 0000 1000 | 0008h
0 | 0000 0000 0000 0000 | 0000h
-0.5 | 1111 1111 1111 1000 | FFF8h
-10.125 | 1111 1111 0101 1110 | FF5Eh
-25.0625 | 1111 1110 0110 1111 | FE6Fh
-55 | 1111 1100 1001 0000 | FC90h

The table below list examples of digital output data and the corresponding temperature readings for numbers with 9 significant bits (DS18S20):

Temperature (°C) | Binary Digital Output | Hexadecimal
---: | :--- | :---
+125.0 | ... | ...
+85.0 | 0000 0000 1010 1010 | 00AAh
+25.0 | 0000 0000 0011 0010 | 0032h
+0.5 | 0000 0000 0000 0001 | 0001h
0 | 0000 0000 0000 0000 | 0000h
-0.5 | 1111 1111 1111 1111 | FFFFh
-10.0 | ... | ...
-25.0 | 1111 1111 1100 1110 | FFCEh
-55.0 | 1111 1111 1001 0010 | FF92h

## Memory

The circuit's memory consists of an SRAM scratch-pad.

The circuit powers-up in a low-power idle state and the initial values are assigned to the registers. The  power-on reset value of the temperature register is for instance +85°C.

A [CRC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_redundancy_check)-8 register is provided and will be updated after each modification. The polynomial function is: x^8 + x^5 + x^4 + 1 (0x31); which is the same as for the 1-Wire Bus-System. 

### DS18B20

Byte | Access | Name | Initial Value
---: | :--- | :--- | :---
 0 | RO | Temperature LSB | 50h
 1 | RO | Temperature MSB | 05h
 2 | RW | High Threshold Alarm (TH) | loaded from EEPROM
 3 | RW | Low Threshold Alarm (TL) | loaded from EEPROM
 4 | RW | Configuration | loaded from EEPROM
 5 | RO | Reserved | always FFh
 6 | RO | Reserved | always 0ch
 7 | RO | Reserved | always 10h
 8 | RO | CRC for bytes 0 through 7

The user can set the conversion resolution using bit:5,6 of the configuration register. Bit-7 reads always as 0 and bit:0-4 always as 1.

Value | Resolution | Conversion Time
---: | ---: | ---:
1F | 9 | 93.75ms
3F | 10 | 187.5ms
5F | 11 | 375ms
7F | 12 | 750ms

### DS18S20

Byte | Access | Name | Initial Value
---: | :--- | :--- | :---
 0 | RO | Temperature LSB | AAh
 1 | RO | Temperature MSB | 00h
 2 | RW | High Threshold Alarm (TH) | loaded from EEPROM
 3 | RW | Low Threshold Alarm (TL) | loaded from EEPROM
 4 | RO | Reserved | always FFh
 5 | RO | Reserved | always FFh
 6 | RO | Count Remain | 0Ch 
 7 | RO | Count Per °C | always 10h
 8 | RO | CRC for bytes 0 through 7

Temperature with a resolution greater than 9 bits can be calculated from the temperature register, the Count-Remain register and the Count-Per-°C register in the sratch-pad memory using the following equation:

TEMPERATURE = (TEMP_READ - 0.25) + (COUNT_PER_C - COUNT_REMAIN) / COUNT_PER_C

The TEMP_READ value is obtained by truncating the 0.5°C bit (bit 0) from the temperature data. 

## Alarm

There is nonvolatile EEPROM backup storage for the Alarm registers. Data in the EEPROM registers is retained while the device is powered down; at power-up the EEPROM data is reloaded into the corresponding scratch-pad locations.

After the circuit performs a temperature measurement, the temperature value is compared to the user-defined two’s complement Alarm trigger values stored in the TH and TL registers. These registers hold the threshold in °C.  This is a smaller resolution than provided by the temperatur registers. Hence, least significant bits of the measured temperature are clipped (i.e. bit:0 if a 9-bit resolution is used) and only the eight most significant bits are used in the TH and TL comparison.

An Alarm condition exists if the measured temperature is lower than or equal to TL or higher than TH. The Alarm flag inside the circuit is set according to the Alarm condition and updated after every temperature measurement; therefore, if the Alarm condition goes away, the flag will be turned off.

The Master device can check the Alarm flag status of all circuits on the bus by issuing an Alarm-Search ROM command. Any circuits with a set alarm flag will respond to the command, so the Master can determine exactly which circuits have experienced an Alarm condition. If an Alarm condition exists and the TH or TL settings have changed, another temperature measurement should be initiated to validate the Alarm condition.

If the circuit Alarm function is not used, the Alarm registers can serve as general-purpose memory.

## Functions

The Functions listed below are provided by the circuit:

| # | Command | Description 
---: | :--- | :--- 
44 | Convert T | Start temperature measurement.
4E | Write Sratch-Pad | Write TH and TL.
48 | Copy Sratch-Pad | Save TH and TL to EEPROM.
B8 | Recall E2 | Restore TH and TL from EEPROM.
B4 | Read Power Supply | Read power-supply mode.
BE | Read Sratch-Pad | Read entire 9-byte sratch-pad.

The circuit needs to be addressed by ROM command before a Function can be invoked.

### Convert T

This Function initiates a temperature measurement. The resulting thermal data is stored after a while in the temperature registers and the circuit returns to its low-power idle state.

The Master may issue Read-Time-Slot signals and the circuit will respond by transmitting 0 while the operation is in progress and 1 when the operation is completed.

### Write Sratch-Pad

This Function writes to a consecutive register sequence on the scratch-pad:
* DS18B20: it writes TH, TL and the Configuration registers (3 bytes).
* DS18S20: it writes TH and TL registers (2 bytes).

Data must be transmitted least significant bit first (i.e. starting with LSB of TH). The Master may want to read-back the scratch-pad and verify the written data.

The data on the scratch-pad may be corrupted if the Master issues an early Reset Pulse; i.e. before all bits have been transmitted.

### Read Sratch-Pad

This Function reads the contents of the sratch-pad. The data transfer starts with the least significant bit of byte 0 and continues through the sratch-pad until the 9th byte is read. The Master may start a new transaction with a Reset Pulse at any time if only part of the sratch-pad data is needed.

### Copy Sratch-Pad

This Function initiates a backup of the writable scratch-pad registers to EEPROM:
* DS18B20: TH, TL and the Configuration registers.
* DS18S20: TH and TL registers.

The Master may issue Read-Time-Slot signals and the circuit will respond by transmitting 0 while the operation is in progress and 1 when the operation is completed.

### Recall E2

This Function initiates the restoration of the writable scratch-pad registers from EEPROM:
* DS18B20: TH, TL and the Configuration registers.
* DS18S20: TH and TL registers.

The Master may issue Read-Time-Slot signals and the circuit will respond by transmitting 0 while the operation is in progress and 1 when the operation is completed.

This operation is performed automatically at power-up.

### Read Power-Supply

This Function must be followed by a Read-Time-Slot signal. A parasite-powered circuits will pull the bus Low; externally powered circuits won't respond.

VDD must be grounded for operation in parasite power mode. A parasite-powered circuit won't provide all operations and needs explicit power switching of the bus line.
